So,
thank you for coming this morning.
And, Karen, I'll leave it to you to thank.
Thank you.
Tena koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee.
My name is Karen Price, chair of Public Trust, and with me today
is our deputy chair-
That's fine. That's carry on
...
Will Peate, and our Chief Executive, Glenis Talavi.
We're also joined by Carl Crayfour and Caroline Grainne from the
Ministry of Justice, should there be any questions that sit within
their remit.
We are here to provide insight into Public Trust's role under the Protection
of Personal and Property Rights Act, particularly our role in
protecting the rights and interests of New Zealanders
who have lost decision-making capacity.
Under the act, Public Trust is the sole entity
authorized to undertake private manager examinations, and
these are independent checks on the financial management of
court-appointed property managers and are carried
out for the courts.
This is a statutory safeguard for some of our most vulnerable
citizens. It ensures that where someone has lost
capacity, their finances are being properly managed and their
interests protected.
We understand the committee is interested in the impacts of recent
regulatory and funding changes on these
services. Those changes involved two key
shifts. First, an increase in the asset and
income thresholds for when a property manager is required,
and second, an increase in the regulated hourly
fee for this work, the first increase in 36
years. As a board, we're very conscious
that the framework should feel fair and proportionate to the people
living with its consequences.
I want to be clear, though, about Public Trust's role in this framework.
We operate within a strict legislative and cost recovery
regime. We have no discretion over our
fees. We cannot waive them, and we do not
decide who requires an examination.
Public Trust is not a policy agency.
Decisions about funding, regulated charges,
thresholds, and any transitional arrangements sit with the
Ministry of Justice and ultimately with Parliament.
At the same time, we recognize there are areas, particularly
around communications with property managers, where we could have
done better, and we welcome the chance to discuss that with the committee.
We've never lost sight that these changes impact real people.
Many are acting on behalf of vulnerable loved ones and managing
complex responsibilities.
We know we hold an important role in the system, and we welcome
the scrutiny of our role.
We share the committee's interests in a system that protects vulnerable
people, treats property managers fairly, and remains
proportionate and affordable.
I will now hand over to our Chief Executive, Glenis Talavi, to explain
how these changes are playing out operationally.
Not too long.
Right.
So firstly, as Karen mentioned, we acknowledge
that this transition has been particularly challenging for some people affected by
the changes.
By way of context, when someone loses decision-making capacity and does not
have an enduring power of attorney, the court may appoint a
property manager to manage their financial affairs.
And where assets and income exceed a threshold, that appointment
usually lasts for three or five years, which is quite important in
the context of these changes.
Each year, that property manager must provide financial statements to the court,
and the court asks Public Trust to independently examine
those statements and report back to the court.
The work that we do there is the private manager examination.
And as you're aware, from October 2024, the
regulated hourly fee for this work increased, and at the same
time, the thresholds for requiring a property manager were
raised.
Can you just be clear about what those new rates are?
So the rates changed, I think, from $136-
... an hour to about $247 an hour. It was the first change in
36 years.
And the property value?
Increased from 15,000 to 25,000.
So-
Okay
... in essence, you should only need an administrator if you have less than
$25,000 worth of assets.
Yes. Or income.
Or income. Sorry, yes, and/or income.
38,000.
And the other thing you haven't mentioned that you might want to identify, which
is critical, is that previously there was a fund to
pay the fees, and that was removed, wasn't it?
That's correct.
Okay. All right.
So I was just getting into that now.
Just close. Yeah. Cool.
Yeah.
So in principle, raising the thresholds means that less
people will need a property manager and therefore an examination.
Mm-hmm.
So covering what I said just before.
Previous appointments are for three or five years, and so there are
people that potentially qualify underneath that threshold but have
existing appointments, and that's where the transitional challenges
remain. Now, at
the same time, this was compounded by the removal
of the government subsidy that previously covered Public Trust fees
for low asset and low income clients.
So,
that means that there's about 1,000 people that
now have a transitional problem, i.e., they've got existing court orders
but have income or assets less than-
Right
... the new threshold.
Now-
Which is a terrible policy position to be in, isn't it?
It is.
Okay. Now, are you finished? Because we're-- I'm suspecting there's going to be an
avalanche of questions in a minute.
Look, what I would say is that,
just to perhaps finalize the picture, is
we undertake about 3,000 private manager examinations every
year.
We've seen a huge increase in complaints and inquiries as a result
of the changes, and increasing levels of unpaid
debt where there really is no realistic recovery pathway, where
these people are unable to now pay the fees that they've
incurred for the private manager examination.
And of course that directly impacts the experience that
people have
of the service and trust in the system.
We have made some changes to make our...
If I think about the service itself, so we actively have looked for
ways to, how can we make this as efficient and effective as possible?
And have incorporated some new technology to help minimize
the time spent on examinations to lower the cost.
Okay.
Just one last thing.
Yeah.
Sorry.
And we've changed the way that we engage with property
managers so that they get information and support up front in
the process before we undertake the examination.
Which is a big change following customer feedback following the
changes. So-
All right. I'm assuming we're going to get inside that. Sorry. Right.
The Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb. Thank you for fronting on this,
because you don't have to go too far to see the distress that
this has caused, right? And I accept that there's decisions made
by government that have resulted
in this. I guess from your end,
the reports suggest that not only is it
$247 an hour, but it's like 10
hours of work. Which then becomes, if you've got a
$2,500 bill, plus GST,
that's more than all the income you'd get off your
$50,000 investment that grandma left you, right?
So I guess I'm really interested to know about the
scale,
how you determine how much you have to do. Because it's not an audit.
So how do you determine how much work you have to do?
And why do you reach a conclusion that
it's 10 hours sometimes?
So what I would say, on average it takes around two hours to do a private
manager examination. So a 10-hour examination is quite rare and
exceptional, and there are often a lot of exceptional circumstances that might
surround an examination that takes that length of time.
But yeah, on average it's
between two and three hours.
Is it within your power to
have
a fixed fee framework that captures
almost all of the audits, unless they're truly extraordinary, or
examinations?
Well, the legislation prescribes an hourly rate that
we're able to charge.
Yeah, so is your answer no?
Our answer is that we haven't explored a fixed fee, but the
legislation says you can charge an hourly rate, and we charge that.
But does that preclude it?
I think that the nature of the examinations is that we are
always focused on how we can quickly and efficiently deliver an
examination. Some examinations, by the nature of the information
that's provided, the depth of financial transactions that might be
provided, take longer than others.
And so-
Have you asked, given that you've got this ridiculous
situation where if a person
becomes unwell today, they have one regime which is
good. But if they'd had an order made a year ago or
so, they're locked into an
overly
costly regime and have had
the subsidy ripped from under them.
Have you approached the Ministry for a legislative change to fix that?
Yes, we have.
Yeah. Yes. Do you know if it's forthcoming?
That's a question for the Ministry.
I think that's a question for the Ministry.
And is it only a legislative change?
So we have, even before the changes come into effect, made it very
clear to the Ministry that there will be a transitional problem, that it would
either require legislative change or continued funding support
to resolve.
Okay.
So there is alternative options.
One more, Duncan. Are you with the people, because I feel for these
people. The people who have got these large debts that they
can't pay, are you actively talking to
them and accepting that they're unrecoverable so they don't have them hanging over
their head? Are you forgiving them?
In the sense of saying, "We get it, you can't pay.
We're not chasing you."
So first and foremost, we'll engage with people around, is there an
arrangement we can come to? And we're very flexible about what those arrangements
look like. And then as any commercial entity would do, we
absolutely would review what is the reasonableness of a recovery
from a commercial standpoint, and we have provisions and write-offs, processes-
Yeah
... any commercial entity would.
Okay. Okay. And just- I'm going to- But when you do that,
are you looking at the ability of that person and the impact on them,
or just whether you can get the money out of them?
Do you have compassion when you're doing this?
I think we have a lot of compassion in the work that we do in this and in many
other areas of our business.
Right. I'm going to Mr. Tom Rutherford.
Thank you. Just a couple of quick questions.
I had a constituent come and see me last year, for example, and
she was charged approximately about $600
just for Public Trust to obtain and review a
bank statement. How does that work?
It's very difficult for me to talk about an individual circumstance without
knowing the full details around it.
Right. He's going to give it to you.
Yeah.
He's going to say-
And we're happy to follow up.
Right. Let's do it that way. Yeah.
In general-
Yeah
... the average PME takes around two hours by the time we receive
information from the court, create a report, and return
information back to the court, and liaise with all of the other
players in that particular process.
And the charge for two hours work is $600?
No.
The hourly rate is $247.
Yeah. So I guess what I'm trying to get at is,
I get the government decisions, and you're working within the
framework that you have. I understand that.
But these are people who are-
Mm. Mm
...
that just comes off, effectively, the benefit they've received.
They're in really trying circumstances.
And 600 bucks for a review of a bank statement is a
significant amount of money.
Absolutely. Absolutely agree. And-
So you'll have to see the example, and we-
It won't be $600 for a bank statement
But it does come...
Just to sup on that. It does give rise, you're
lawyers, right? Well, some of you are, I know.
I qualified-
You're well aware that a partner at a modest law firm will
charge 1,000 bucks an hour.
No, they won't.
Yes, they do. Even in Christchurch.
Maybe-
And then a new graduate might be charged in at 300,
250, right?
Mm-hmm.
My question is, you have one standard rate of just under
$250. Is that right? Because I would've thought in
Tom's case, whatever the situation is,
if it is reviewing a bank statement, that does not require a senior
person. Do you have graduated charge rates?
It's a blended rate. So it's accountants largely that do this work in
Public Trust, and we have senior accountants supervising junior accountants.
But that blended rate then makes it patently unfair because if you
ask, someone who's reviewing a bank statement, then
now what you're doing is socializing a cost, average cost across
everyone, which means the
disadvantage of paying a higher proportionate fee.
Well, no, because the junior accountants can't do the work unless they've been well
supervised and trained by the senior accountants.
So that's how you end up with a blended rate,
because it recognizes the cost for a commercial entity to provide that
service.
That seems extraordinary.
In actual fact, the rate is not fully cost
recoverable by Public Trust.
No, it's not about the rate. It's about the complexity.
If you've got a complex case, you can imagine someone being charged a higher
rate. Someone doing a review of a bank statement would be the lowest of the
low in any firm, accounting firm, whatever.
So are you permitted to charge
differential hourly rates?
Not for this work. This work, the rate is specified in
legislation.
Does the law require you to only charge one rate?
Yes.
You can't charge differential rates?
No.
Not for this work. I think it's important for PME work,
they are appointed by the courts with an hourly rate.
I think the question of the fixed cost is something that we potentially can take
off and explore. But it is a very restricted regime.
Is this work that-
Hang on. I've got Paul over here.
Sorry. Yeah. Thank you.
I'll just sup on that.
Thanks for the work that you do. Two questions.
One is, are you able to go back to the court and
essentially get new orders for cases where you foresee-
Yes.
Okay.
Yes. The property manager can go and do that, but they will incur a cost to do that
too. So-
No, I appreciate that. But there is the ability to determine based on
you know that cost.
Yep.
You can make the foresee-
Yes.
Yeah. So have you
done that exercise on the majority of the cases that you've seen to
go,
are they in the best regime in terms of that transitional process?
We've made it very clear to
property managers that that is a choice that they have.
We
can look at their financial statements.
It's not our role to give them advice, though, around which pathway they would like
to take in terms of continuing with examinations versus going back to
court to get new orders.
Yeah.
One thing that we have done is talk to the judicial system, and where we
see we receive now statements that have very low assets,
we actually go back to the court and say, "Are you sure you want
us to do this examination given these low assets?" And we are seeing
new directions from the court as a result of that.
Great.
We're also seeing that often, that's a case of that we haven't been given all of
the financial statements, and so it's raised awareness around some
other issues within that process.
So I appreciate that, and appreciate that it's not your job to give the property
managers that feedback. Just noting the feedback you gave to the ministry, it
might be valuable to be maybe slightly more directional there.
Yep.
And then the second question I had was, you talk about the size of the debts not
being recoverable, and I think I heard you say that a part of that
is complaints that you're getting and the time that's going into the complaints.
Is there a different way to manage the complaints or something that needs to
happen from a regulation or legislative perspective to essentially say,
complaints of X nature don't cut the mustard for
further work? It sounds like you've got to, at the moment, deal with
every complaint that's creating cost, and I would imagine in a number of
cases unnecessarily.
So one of the things that we've done is taking on board the feedback that we've
received from customers since the change, is we have now agreed clear
pathways with the Ministry of Justice and the courts as to with
different natures of complaints, which
entities will respond in terms of engaging with that.
One of the key things that we realized is with the
change, with the removal of the government subsidy, for a lot of property managers,
the first time that they were hearing from us is when we were asking them to pay
our fee, and they hadn't had to pay before.
Right.
We have changed that. So we are now engaging with them upfront to explain the
process, how they can help shorten the process to reduce
costs,
and we have significantly changed our way of working with the court system
to improve the experience for property managers.
Okay. Now going to Shenille Village.
Thank you. Just a question around the process of how people end up in
this situation.
Sure.
I know for many years Public Trust has been offering a free will
service. I don't know if you still do that, but-
Have you changed the communication around people kind
of entering into your system? Because, and correct me if I'm wrong, as I
understand it, once people see that many of your clients may
be vulnerable people who wouldn't usually engage with their own
personal lawyer, they would have a will written, and then you would be
dealing with their estate after they pass away.
Because of the
significant change in the way that this will be priced,
are you going to be changing the way that you communicate with people before they
make that choice to-
Okay
... do their will with you?
Yeah, so look, I think
we have very cost-effective ways that people can write
wills with our business. I think more so in this case with private
manager examinations, which is very heavily prescribed.
But people can avoid private manager examinations and the need for the court
to appoint a property manager by putting in place an enduring power of attorney.
And we are absolutely advocating, we've created a significant amount
of content to promote
enduring powers of attorney, and we offer that online and in person
for people. Today, only one in six New Zealanders have an enduring power of
attorney in place, and that would change this whole system.
It would avoid the need for a property manager, avoid the need to go to court, and
they certainly wouldn't need the private manager examinations.
I'm certainly not going to ask members whether they've got enduring power of
attorneys. Well, I'm going to Dr. Sunan because he is just desperate
to ask a question.
I have quite a few questions.
Well, let's see how we go.
Well, we have quite a few questions, and I've been skipped twice here.
So,
now picking up on that, one of the things we asked you about last year,
and you just mentioned EPOA, which is good.
A lot of materials, are they in multiple languages?
They are in a couple of languages at the moment, and that is something that we're
really focused on, in getting them into more languages.
Because the problem that we have is, and we raised this last year, and you've
raised it again in the pre-hearing questions, is that there's significant
undertake, I guess, from migrant communities, Māori and Pasifika as well.
Mm-hmm.
So what new work since last year? Because last year you said there wasn't a lot of
things happening. What new work is happening? Is my first question.
So new work that we've been doing has been looking at
how do we build greater competency and
capability internally, and working with partnership
organizations to better understand how do ethnic communities
engage and think about
our services. Recognizing that the services are
often legislative and there is a legal process.
So it's how do we translate that process into something that's
meaningful and relevant in terms of those communities.
We are on a journey. Translating information is one
thing. We often talk about how do people get access to
interpreters to help to engage with our services and the like.
So it's something that we are very focused on.
And you're tracking that?
We track it through. So
asking people to share their ethnicities with us is a choice that they
make in terms of the data that we provide, but we track it more
broadly in our research-
That's it
... in terms of looking at demographics.
One other question is, you mentioned in terms of the price with wills or EPOA.
One of the things we hear is that that price, that cost,
is still a barrier
because they could go to CAB and it would be for free.
So what then would be, is there a fee waiver system for
EPOA and will?
Yeah, so we definitely have different ways that we promote, particularly,
we obviously offer discounts
for people who have Gold Cards and the like. We're always looking at our pricing.
I think that online you can do an EPOA for,
I think it's $179. So, for a legal
document that needs to be witnessed by a lawyer, in terms of your
capacity, I think is a really competitive price point.
And of course, they can go elsewhere.
And part of our content is encouraging awareness so that people do
actually get these important legal documents in place.
Have you got one more?
No, I think that'd be sufficient.
I don't believe it. Okay, I'm going to doctor-
I'm giving other people a chance to-
I just have one question. It strikes me that
there are
agencies, firms out there that do jobs like this
either at a very low fee or for nothing sometimes.
Yeah.
But the legislation requires that you do it for
$247 an hour. Do you think it would be
appropriate to liberalize that so that people could look
around for other qualified people to do this review for the court?
I was-
So I
think the thing is that you can always have different systems, but this is for
quite a limited group of people with quite a specific set of needs, and
often their situation is complex.
And so I think the answer is yes, then the question would just be around
capacity and quality. So-
Yeah
... given that they are appointed by the court, not the property manager, I think
is an important difference about where you go.
So it's not maybe the property manager to shop around to find
something, they are court-appointed.
Right.
Well I-
So just a difference, I think-
I mean, I'm thinking about budget advisory, because they had chartered accountants
in them.
Mm.
You know?
Yes.
Those kind of people.
But it is the difference, if I may just-
Yeah
... it is the difference between the court appointment process over a p- private-
... someone of diminished capacity, and just the standard that somebody else would
have to reach so that you didn't have problems.
I think it's an interesting policy trade-off,
but there are limits, I think, around how far you could go.
And the Law Commission has recently put up a report
recommending changes-
Yeah
... to the adult decision-making law, which would encompass some of
these challenges, which I think is,
in terms of making it much moreMore flexible.
I do think that the key with the legislation is it prescribes the rate, it
prescribes who does the work, and it prescribes that it needs to be by an
accountant or a qualified individual.
So, it is prescriptive at the moment
in terms of the
process. So,
as I said, the recommendations coming out of that piece of work
is looking at how does that evolve into something perhaps less
prescriptive.
And what's your margin on $247 an hour?
For the private manager examination work? We don't recover our costs for that work.
It's not a cost recovery piece.
So, any other questions? Look, I think
you've heard from the committee, we're
pretty concerned about,
for some people, it seems an extraordinarily high fee.
So what would be useful, because we all need to write a report, what would be
useful
to be clearer about what are the other options, like you talked about
going back to the court and getting better, more fine
decisions. What are the options you're doing that will
lead to a better commercial outcome for the client, i.e. a lower fee?
And you talked about fixed fees, all that sort of stuff.
That would be useful to just have a real clarity around
that. But I think I'm going to ask you to also be clear
to the committee exactly, given what you can
do under that arrangement, what further legislative changes you might
want. And I'd like the committee to be able to know
that so that we can incorporate that into the
report. But ultimately, what we're looking for is a
good public service, well-maintained, offering a good service at a reasonable
price. And
obviously, we've got some tension points at the moment.
So everyone talks about legislative fixes.
Actually, sometimes it's not just legislative fixes.
So that's why I'm asking for both.
Yep.
Right?
So,
if I talk about the service as it exists at the moment, we are constantly looking
at ways as to how we can get more efficient and effective.
We have recently implemented technology to support that team to speed
up examinations. We have changed communications with the
court. We are liaising more proactively with the court, particularly for
lower asset and income individuals, to see if examinations still are
really required at the court's direction, or if there are other directions that
they can provide. Getting in place an EPOA would avoid
all of this-
Mm. Yeah
... pain.
Right.
And so being able to have a-
It won't
... even policy support around enduring powers of attorney would make a
huge
difference-
Okay
... particularly with our aging population.
Camilla mentioned free wills earlier.
We provided free wills because we were funded under our contract with the Ministry
of Justice to do that. Enduring powers of attorneys are another huge
opportunity that would free up the court system immensely if people had those
things in place.
Well, have you mind sending that out in writing?
Because I think we'll try and capture some of that into the report. Sorry, Pete.
Yes, sure. I think the
real thing is the difference between the short term and the long term.
So the short term fix and a range of transitional stuff associated with this.
Look,
part of it's a challenge that needs some funding, some legs, some
things would kind of help. The thing, though, for New Zealand is the population
is aging and aging fast overall. The number of people
who will be getting into the area where diminished capacity through dementia,
other things associated with aging, that is a
significant demographic shift going on, yet
our systems are built for a world previous.
Mm.
And so just to add to Glenys's point,
the move at getting more than one in six
is going to be critical. Otherwise, the court system is going to be
absolutely stuck. It cannot process the amount
of stuff through the thing. So public trust is very much on the front line of
this interchange for the most vulnerable, but also for that
large swathe of New Zealanders. I'm sure most members know
somebody who's, some family that's going through an issue with dementia, and
diminished capacity. The EPOA is the way through, not a
court-appointed system. Otherwise, it's going to get clogged.
Well, on that pessimistic and downer- ... note, Mr.
Pete- ... I think we'll draw this to a conclusion.
But if you can help us with this-
We will do
... that'd be very helpful. Thank you. Hey, thanks for your time.
You've heard the committee, so that's great. Thank you, everyone.
Right. Now.
We're waiting for the Judicial. Are they outside?
You may have to leave.
If that's what you're worried
about. Oh, I read
that. I read that.
Hilarious.
Right. We're going to hear from the Judicial Conduct Commissioner.
Judicial Conduct Commissioner.
I'm going to try and get some timing.
Good morning. Hopefully, you're not on your own.
No, I brought some support.
Right. Good.
Familiar faces.
Indeed.
Good morning.
I was thinking about
So we've been looking forward to hearing from you.
I'm not sure that this committee's heard from
you
on many occasions.
First time in about six years, we think.
Yes.
Wow.
Well, it's a very active committee, and we made a special request to hear
from you. Okay. So we've got half an hour,
so it'd be good,
because
no one's heard from you-
For six years.
For six years. It would be useful just to
be clear about what you do-
Sure
... judiciary, all that sort of stuff.
Obviously, we've read your reportBut also hearing about current issues.
That'd be great.
Sure. Thank you, Chairman.
So just by way of introductions, my name is Wayne Newell.
I am the Manager of Statutory Appointments and
Specialist Functions for the Ministry of Justice, which, as part of its wider role,
has the administrative responsibility for the Office of the Judicial Conduct
Commissioner. With me today we have the Judicial Conduct Commissioner, Alan
Ritchie, the Deputy Judicial Conduct Commissioner, Mary Olivier,
and at the back there, Chris Flaws, who is the Advisor and Case
Manager for the Office of the Conduct Commissioner.
Just by point of difference probably from most of the organizations you've
spoken to over the last month or so,
the Conduct Commissioner is entirely a creature of statute.
There are no staff employed by the Office of the Conduct Commissioner.
Both Chris and I work for the Ministry of Justice.
It has no separately managed budget.
It's all conducted within the Ministry of Justice.
There is no board. There are only these two statutory officers who are not
employees of the Ministry and have a decision-making role
rather than a governance
role.
The other matter that might be useful for the committee to know is
that under the act, the Judicial Conduct
Commissioner and Judicial Conduct Panel Act 2004, the
commissioners and the commissioner's office has a duty of confidentiality, which
means that it is unable to talk about
specific
discussion about any individual matter.
Happy to talk about process and general matters, but we can't talk about any
individual case before the office.
Just lastly, and the committee may have it available to it, the
commissioner provides an annual report to Parliament, which sets out
its performance and activities over the year.
And we're obviously happy to answer any questions you might have.
Right. Thank you very much. First question from Dr. Sue Ng.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. And also apologies, I do need
to go to another hearing halfway through this, so I'm going to ask some really
quick questions. So in terms of the things the
Judicial
Conduct Commissioner reviews, it's both in the court but as well as
conduct of judges outside the court.
Yes.
Just in terms of in the court or in general, what proportion
of that potentially pertains to elements of racism or
bullying or harassment?
There has, over the years, been quite a
reasonable amount of concern over
overbearing behavior on the part of judges.
And there's been a lot of publicity about it really, and it's
covered in the annual report. But
that seems to have moderated over the years.
And one of the important things that we're able to do
when there are those sorts of allegations is to listen to
audio recordings, occasionally video, but mostly audio
recordings of behavior. And if there is
misconduct by a judge, it is perfectly obvious.
Because obviously,
I hear through various networks and
Asian lawyers in particular about particularly certain judges'
conduct, or
either accidental or unconscious bias or
racism against particular ethnic groups.
So I just want to check, when you do review those, do you also make recommendations
on things like cultural competency and et cetera?
Yeah. Well, we do have that sort of wide brief to
be able to do it,
and
we are able to consider issues
of bias,
and the racial types of things that you're suggesting.
Sometimes occurs in the Maori Land Court as
well.
Mm-hmm.
But of course,
we are constrained by
that section and the act that you'll be aware of-
Mm-hmm
... which means that we can't challenge the legality-
Of course
... or correctness of not just the outcome, but
of any direction, order or what have you.
And we've got to look at it in that because
the judicial independence is still a very important
thing.
Absolutely. So I'm mainly coming from a perspective of-
Okay
... improving the dignity and the trust that we
have in the judiciary as opposed to decision.
One final question is, do you do any work around,
not so much like promoting or actually asking people that you are
a group that exists and people can bring it to you. Because how...
Is your work, is it widely known? Because again, we
hear these complaints, but we never see them
manifesting into a formal complaint to you.
So do you do any?
Well, we get our fair share of complaints of course, and there is
the internet. If people want to know how to
complain about a judge, it instantly comes up and they're referred
to our office and are given
assistance with the making of a complaint.
We don't advertise in the-
... Auckland Weekly though.
Okay. Are you right? Okay. So I've got a supplementary from Rima
Naude.
Just a supplementary. Good morning.
The supplementary with respect to people
sometimes thinking they might be able to make a complaint about the
legality or the correctness of a decision.
Yes. Mm-hmm.
And I see that on your website, you clearly state the process cannot be
used to challenge the legality
or correctness. How often do you get people-
Mm-hmm
That's something that I'm just-
Yeah. Well, the-
... slightly curious about
A lot of the complaints. You've read the reports.
We might deal
with
a dozen of them by way of a referral to the head of
bench because of a conduct issue. But look, most of the
complaints are
from largely people who have been through a
testing process of litigation. Often, they're
unrepresented by lawyers.
They've been turned down. They've reached the end of what I call the end of the
courthouse road.
Yeah.
And what final chance have I got? And so they
come to us.
Mind you, the issue over Section 8 [2] , there can be
exceptions to that. It's been established in the courts that
there can be exceptions
where there is
obvious bias
or other conduct behavior. The fact that it
might have resulted in a direction, or
instruction, or order-
Or decision
... or other decision, as in Section 8 [2] ,
we can
still take action,
usually by referring to a head of bench.
Can I just ask a quick supplementary, please?
Yeah.
What's an example of an obvious bias that is very
obvious to you
and your colleagues?
Well,
for instance,
there can be all manner, but if a judge were
to say, "Don't talk in that Māori language to me, I
can't understand it." That sort of-
Mm
... ill-considered response to the litigant-
... would be one example, I suppose.
Thank you.
Okay, going to Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Well, thank you all for being here.
And first, Commissioner, I just want to
thank you. I think you were actually trying to retire, but you're staying in- ...
place until your replacement's found.
But I want to acknowledge your service and thank you, because you may not be
back before this committee before your replacement.
In six years' time.
I don't know.
But I just wanted to put that on the record, because thank you.
You're doing a very important job.
Appreciate that.
Again, obviously we don't want to go into specific cases, but obviously the kind of
first hearer as a complaint comes to you as the
commissioner.
Mm.
And then there is obviously this process where a
judicial conduct panel can be empowered, I suppose is the word you might use.
But can you just talk me through your
process, or when does it reach that level that you actually then
recommend to the Attorney General to get a panel?
Can you just give me some insights?
Yes. I think I can do it quite briefly.
The Act, it's a pretty good piece of legislation, this.
And the Act, section 15 [1] is the
first bit where it says,
"The commissioner must conduct a preliminary
examination of every complaint as soon as possible
and form an opinion on which of the following steps
to be taken." And there are only four steps.
They are quite limited. One is to take no further action,
which can happen if the circumstances don't demand further action.
Second is to dismiss the complaint for one of the reasons allowed in the Act,
including that it's beyond my jurisdiction because of
the provisions of the Act. Or the third one
is to refer it to a head of bench. That's
because the examination has revealed
a problem
with the behavior of the judge in court, not a decision, but
with behavior. And once
that
step has been taken, referred to the head of bench, say the chief support
judge or the chief justice or whatever,
that's it.
Our role is over. It's up to the
senior judge to deal with that. Remember that these heads of bench all
have a role
under their own legislation about the efficient and proper
administration of the courts. So,
that's it. And I really do have to indicate to complainants when
a referral has been made to a head of bench that they cannot
necessarily expect to hear anything further.
Certainly not from me, because my role is over, and probably not from the head of
bench as well. And then the fourth step, of course, is the
recommendation to the Attorney General that
a panel be established. And we've got a notable case before a panel at the
moment, as you know.
There have been very few of those. There's more than people think, but
few of-
I suppose I'm curious, though,
what factors would you take into consideration, again, quite generally,
in deciding, okay, I'm going to recommend to the Attorney General?
To the Attorney General.
Yeah.
It has to be a behavior
that is extraordinary in terms of
ordinary judicial conduct-
Yeah
... really.
What it would have way back, this is public information.
There was the one back in 2010 or
whatever it was, where there was an
alleged failure by the judge to
disclose a conflict of interest, and it was
rated as quite important by the litigants at the time.
Is this the racing?
Yes.
Yes. That's right. Yeah.
And there has been another one where
there was behavior which was not fit on the part
of the judge.
But they're very few and far between.
Thank you.
Right. I've got a question from Camilla Villich.
Thank you, and thanks for being here with us today and for the work that you do.
I've kind of got two questions really.
The first one is because security of appointment is so fundamentally
important for how the judiciary works, so they can judge without fear or
favor, when there is a recommendation for a panel, how is
that balanced? And a kind of second related question is really
what-Apart from, obviously you have the quite
significant powers of removal, but what other types of
recommendations may you make in situations-
We don't have any-
... short of that
... power of recommendation. Remember,
and the most recent case is a good illustration of
what you're saying.
In that case, I made it clear in my recommendation to the
Attorney General
that whether a panel was actually established
was for the Attorney General to decide, not me.
And I always go back to, Mr. Webb will know him,
Justice Keish, back in
2013, where he said, "The Judicial Conduct
Commissioner does not make merit determinations
on cases.
He operates," he said in a court proceeding,
"as a clearing house,
and he has to make the decision of what step under Section 15
to take," and those are limited steps.
So in this current case, what the panel does,
I have no say in. Once it's gone to the Attorney General,
Attorney General decides whether there's a panel established.
Once the panel is established,
that's for them. Nothing to do with me.
Their decision is supposed to be out today, I understand. I don't know.
So last question, I think, from Dr. Duncan Webb.
I guess, we get emails from disgruntled litigants-
Mm
... like others do have.
Yeah.
And I guess one of the complaints that I think
it would be good to give you an opportunity to speak to
is that
you don't really do anything. In particular,
that, there's this very small number of cases,
I see you've had a bump recently,
that you are empaneled, but
the suggestion that we see is that a reference to a head of
bench
is a slap on the wrist with a wet plastic, if you
like, because I think these people
don't see any outcome from it.
They've engaged in what they see as a complaints process and they're
expecting to see a resolution,
whereas what they get perhaps is
your decision saying, "I've referred it from here to bench," and then not much
else. And so I guess I'm giving an opportunity in a public
forum to explain exactly what that means and what might flow from.
You mean what might flow-
What-
... from a recommendation to a head of bench, for instance?
Well, I mean, even the language around it is all very arcane, right?
It's the judge's boss
to a layperson who then can take internal action.
But I guess, and you'd know, I'm imagining,
what that means. What kind of things would you
expect to happen once you make a reference to a head of bench?
Well, of course, because of the limits on
my authority, I've got to be very careful about that.
And when I do make a recommend- a referral to
a head of bench,
I say to the complainant,
"There is going to be a referral in this particular instance.
What the head of bench does is entirely a matter for
the head of bench," which it is. I can have no influence on that.
But
I often add,
it may be that he or she will consider
their role under, for example, Section 24 of the District Courts
Act-
Yeah
... about the proper administration of justice in the court.
He or she may care to offer some guidance to this
judge or to judges generally about what should have
happened in this particular case.
Maybe
your question is more about transparency as well,
because once it's been referred, what you're saying is
there might be behind the scenes conversations, there might be reflections,
whatever, but there's no transparency around it after it
leaves your end.
And I have no control over it.
But I suppose what Mr. Webb's
raising is
should there, could there be greater transparency
about ultimately what happened? It was dismissed, that's clear.
There were some follow-up actions. Should that...
Maybe I'm-
No, no
... taking your step a little, taking your thoughts a little bit further, but do
you have a view on that?
Look,
to be fair,
some heads of bench
do occasionally write very good letters
to complainants copied to me saying,
"This has not been good enough. I've
got an apology from the judge," et cetera, et cetera.
Right.
I know
the level of
referral to heads of bench is
low
in terms of the total number of complaints we receive.
You know what my commentary on that is, after being involved with
this thing for 20 years or more,
is that we are actually quite lucky to have a judiciary
of the quality that we do in comparison to some-
Just to-
Yeah.
But I think that's the point. Do you think
it ought to be standard practice for the head of
bench to acknowledge to the complainant that they have
received it and to at least outline
in some way
That they're following, they're doing something
Or, what the conclusion was
Because this is a transparency issue, right?
Yes, but shouldn't that question be directed to the heads of bench?
Well, I'm directing it to the very esteemed and
senior, and extremely experienced, knowledgeable judicial
conduct commissioner.
Who are you talking about, Ian?
I do think it's the right question for you, though.
Well,
yeah.
I just feel constrained by the
terms of this act.
Okay. No, I understand that. Right. So, Todd? Todd.
No, I was going to say, you can say whatever you want on your way out.
No, I think just to Dr. Webb's point. We're trying.
Just to Dr. Webb's point, I think, if you
cared to, you could just give a reflection on what you thought would be good
practice.
Well, I do that. As I've explained-
Yeah
... I often refer to, and I think the best
explanation of the
district court judge head of bench,
is in Section 24 of the District Court Act, and it sets out the
role of that judge, including in the
promotion of good practice and-
I suppose you... Hang on, let's put it this different way.
I suppose you would be pleased when you actually get copied in on a letter from a
head of bench back to a complainant, because then you know you've got visibility on
what's happened.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Thank you.
Right. So we're going to draw it to a close.
Hey, thank you for turning up for the first time in six years.
Thank you for your long service,
and thank you, Deputy Commissioner, for what may ever happen
in future. But obviously, we might see you again.
But, that's been very helpful and I think there's sort of that
issue there, the kernel of an idea, I think, which would be helpful.
Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Right. Members, I'm going to suggest we break
until 10:30, reflect on what questions you want to ask about this previous
briefing, and then we'll get back at 10:30.
All right?
Good